173-[JAWS]-Activity: Troubleshoot Create Instance
AWS EC2 Instance Creation and Troubleshooting Lab
Overview
This lab guides you through launching an Amazon EC2 instance using the AWS Command Line Interface (AWS CLI). You will configure the instance with a user data script to set up a LAMP stack (Linux, Apache, MariaDB, PHP). The lab includes troubleshooting steps to resolve common issues encountered during instance creation and configuration. The activity is expected to take approximately 45 minutes.
Objectives
By completing this lab, you will be able to:

Launch an EC2 instance using the AWS CLI.
Troubleshoot AWS CLI commands and Amazon EC2 service settings using basic troubleshooting techniques and open-source tools.

Prerequisites

AWS CLI installed (pre-installed on Amazon Linux AMIs).
AWS credentials (Access Key ID and Secret Access Key) provided by the lab environment.
Basic familiarity with Linux commands and shell scripting.

Task 1: Configuring the AWS CLI
In this task, you configure the AWS CLI with the provided credentials to interact with AWS services.

Run the following command to set up the AWS CLI profile:aws configure


When prompted, enter the following:
AWS Access Key ID: Copy from the lab environment (choose "Details" > "Show" in the lab interface).
AWS Secret Access Key: Copy from the lab environment.
Default region name: Enter the region provided (e.g., us-east-1).
Default output format: Enter json (or as specified).


Verify the configuration by running:aws sts get-caller-identity



Tip: If connecting to an EC2 instance, use the right-click menu to paste values in the terminal.
Task 2: Analyzing the User Data Script
The user data script (create-lamp-instance-v2.sh) configures the EC2 instance with a LAMP stack. Key components of the script include:

Line 1: Shebang (#!/bin/bash) to indicate a bash script.
Lines 7-12: Sets the instance size to t2.small, suitable for running a database and web server.
Lines 16-29: Uses the AWS CLI command aws ec2 describe-regions to list all AWS regions, then queries for a VPC named "Cafe VPC" and captures its ID for instance configuration.

To view the script with line numbers in vi/vim:
vi create-lamp-instance-v2.sh
:set number

Task 3: Running the Script
Run the script to launch the EC2 instance:
./create-lamp-instance-v2.sh

The script is expected to fail initially, requiring troubleshooting.
Task 4: Troubleshooting Issues
Issue 1: Invalid AMI ID
Error Message: 
An error occurred (InvalidAMIID.NotFound) when calling the RunInstances operation: The image id '[ami-xxxxxxxx]' does not exist.

Troubleshooting Steps:

Check the Script: Open create-lamp-instance-v2.sh and locate the line specifying the AMI ID in the aws ec2 run-instances command.
Verify the AMI ID: Ensure the AMI ID is valid for the region specified. Use the AWS CLI to list available AMIs:aws ec2 describe-images --owners amazon --filters "Name=name,Values=amzn2-ami-hvm-*" --query 'Images[*].[ImageId,Name]' --output table


Correct the Region: Confirm the region in the script matches the configured AWS CLI region. Update the script if necessary:aws ec2 run-instances --image-id ami-correct-id --region us-east-1 ...


Re-run the script after updating the AMI ID and region.

Issue 2: Web Page Not Loading
After the instance launches and a public IP address is assigned, the test web page fails to load.
Troubleshooting Steps:

Check Port 80: Verify that TCP port 80 (HTTP) is open in the instance's security group:aws ec2 describe-security-groups --group-ids <security-group-id> --query 'SecurityGroups[*].IpPermissions[]'

Add a rule to allow HTTP traffic if missing:aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress --group-id <security-group-id> --protocol tcp --port 80 --cidr 0.0.0.0/0


Verify Web Server Status: Connect to the LAMP instance using EC2 Instance Connect and check if the Apache web server (httpd) is running:sudo systemctl status httpd

Start the service if it is not running:sudo systemctl start httpd


Install and Use Nmap: On the CLI host instance, install nmap to scan ports:sudo yum install nmap -y

Scan the LAMP instance's public IP for open ports:nmap <public-ip>


Check Logs: View the cloud-init logs for errors in the user data script execution:sudo cat /var/log/cloud-init-output.log



Task 5: Verifying Website Functionality

Navigate to the website using the instance's public IPv4 address:http://<public-ip>


If successful, the cafe website should load. Click the "Menu" link to access http://<public-ip>/order.php.
Verify that you can order items through the website. A successful order indicates the LAMP stack is functioning correctly.

Conclusion
This lab demonstrated how to launch an EC2 instance using the AWS CLI, configure a LAMP stack, and troubleshoot common issues such as invalid AMI IDs and web server connectivity problems. By following the steps, you have gained hands-on experience with AWS CLI commands, EC2 instance management, and basic network troubleshooting.
